PROCESS.md, before:

# Process

This is a guide for myself to document my process, so I won't forget and won't get confused

## Start & Configure Linter & Prettier

1. `npm init`
2. `git init`
3. install extension for vscode: `prettier` & `eslint`
4. install eslint with: `npm install eslint --save-dev`
5. configure eslint with: `npm init @eslint/config`
6. google how to configure prettier with eslint airbnb: `https://gist.github.com/bradtraversy/aab26d1e8983d9f8d79be1a9ca894ab4`
7. install neccesities for eslint and prettier: `npm i -D eslint prettier eslint-plugin-prettier eslint-config-prettier`

## Files Created

8. create a `.prettierrc` file for prettier rules
9. create a `.gitignore` with template from: `https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/main/Node.gitignore`
10. create a `.env` file for future passwords and keys

## Config Prettier

11. turn on `format on save` in vscode
12. choose `prettier` as default formatter in vscode
13. in `.eslintrc.json` added in `extends`: `"prettier"`
14. in `.eslintrc.json` added `plugins`: `"prettier"`
15. in `.eslintrc.json` added in `rules`: `"prettier/prettier": "error"` & `"no-console": "off"`

16. install express with: `npm install express --save`
17. add a `server.js` file and add the code in it from `https://www.npmjs.com/package/express` to use express
18. install nodemon with: `npm install --save-dev nodemon`
19. in `package.json` add in `scripts`: `"dev": "npm run nodemon"`

20. make a `static` folder and inside a `css` and `images` folder
21. make a `views` folder and inside `partials` and `pages` folder

22. install ejs with: `npm install ejs --save`
23. google how to configure ejs: `https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-ejs-to-template-your-node-application`
24. configure ejs in `server.js` with: `app.set('view engine', 'ejs');`
25. set middleware for express in `server.js` with: `app.use(express.static("static"));`

26. install `dotenv` with: `npm install dotenv --save`
27. require `dotenv` in `server.js` with: `require('dotenv').config()`

28. installed `ejs language support` extension for my vscode, otherwise the colors won't be blue and it confuses me

29. added `partials` and `pages`

30. in `mongodb` I made a new project called `dish-exchange` and created a shared (free) database
31. i created a user with a password so I can read and write into my database
32. I first my own IP then in `network access` I deleted my ip and clicked on `add IP adress` followed by `allow access from anywhere`
33. I went to `database` > `browse collections` then I `created a database` with the name `dish-exchange`
34. I made a collection called `dishes`
35. I clcicked on `insert document` and made 2 example dishes or `documents` in my dishes database
36. started to read the mongodb documentation with node driver on atlas: `https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/`

## MongoDB

37. installed mongodb with: `npm install mongodb --save`
38. put in `server.js`: `const MongoClient = require("mongodb");`
39. googled on how to use a `dotenv` for my link with a password for my mongodb_URI: `https://northflank.com/guides/connecting-to-a-mongo-db-database-using-node-js`
40. in my mongodb `database` I clicked on `connect` > `connect with application`
41. in my `server.js` I added `const uri = process.env.mongo_uri;` instead of my password
42. I copied the link and put in my `password` of my user, I changed `cluster0` to `cluster1` (like in mongodb) and put this as a variable in my `dotenv` file
43. I also made a `.envSample` file for later

## Deployment

44. I googled "Deploying with Git" and found: `https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git`
45. One of the steps is to install Heroku CLI (linux ubuntu): `https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli#install-the-heroku-cli`
46. I install Heroku CLI with: `curl https://cli-assets.heroku.com/install-ubuntu.sh | sh`
47. installed heroku with: `npm install heroku --save` or `npm install -g heroku --save` followed by `npm audit fix`
48. create heroku remote for a new app with `heroku create -a dishexchange`
49. terminal asked to press any button and to click on the link to `login` into heroku in my browser and I checked my remotes with `git remote -v`
50. commit and push code with: `git push heroku main`
51. went to the heroku website & to my app into: `settings` and then `reveal config vars`. I put in there my mongodb variable with password that's in my `.env file`.
52. because I got the `error H10` wouldn't work, I stumbled upong making a `procfile` with the code: `web: node server.js`, so heroku would know what to start
53. I googled to know more about procfile: `https://dev.to/lawrence_eagles/causes-of-heroku-h10-app-crashed-error-and-how-to-solve-them-3jnl`
54. heroku got an `error H20`, so I googled and found: `https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18679690/heroku-nodejs-app-with-r10-h10-and-h20-errors`
55. instead of having: `app.listen(3000);` I changed it for heroku to: `app.listen(process.env.PORT || 3000)`

56. I started working on my `pages` HTML/EJS a bit, just to have the basics in there (without the web API of some sort)

57. I installed the vscode extension `gitlens` as it shows extra information (e.g. commits, branches, remotes) about my project when I go into the `source control` tab.

##

## to add later:

58. installed `body-parser` with `npm install body-parser --save`
59. added `const= bodyParser = require('body-parser')` in `server.js`

## adding stuff

59. googled "how to link variables from `server.js` to `ejs`" and found: `https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-make-js-variables-accessible-to-ejs-files/`
60. hard code variables I have in my `.ejs` into `server.js` so I can open it from localhost:3000

61. working on connecting database googled `https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/usage-examples/count/`
62. with `collections.find` it will return a `cursor`, because if it would return all the data at once, the pc's memory might be full and the application wouldn't work good, so instead it returns a `cursor`. source: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/cursor/
63. You can retrieve data from a cursor with `toArray()` if you do want everything at once and it can handle it, or with `forEach()` to look through them one by one.
64. .length is an array property
65. In `server.js` I got the cursor of `dishesCollection` and got every dish with `toArray()`

66. put data in server.js in route `/`
67. added `numberOfDishes` and `allDishes`
68. In `dish.ejs` we want data from `allDishes` with `forloop`

## adding more stuff

# Code

## General

`try` = defines the code block to run (to try)

`catch` defines a code block to handle any error

`finally` or `catch` = defines a code block to run regardless of the result

`throw` defines a custom error

source = https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_try_catch.asp

## Heroku

`heroku --version` = check heroku version

`heroku login` = login with heroku on the browser

`heroku create -a example-app` = to make a new heroku remote and an empty heroku git repo

`git remote -v` = check remotes

`heroku git:remote -a example-app` = to make a heroku remote for the existing example-app

`git remote rename heroku heroku-staging` = rename a remote (this case heroku to heroku-staging)

`git push heroku main` = to deploy code after commiting

source: https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git

## EJS

`<% %>` = to run code

`<%= %>` = replace code with text

`<%- %>` = to include parials

source: https://ejs.co/#docs

# Variables

## In server.js

1. `let database` = variable of the database dish-exchange
2. `let dishesCollection` = variable of dishes collection within dish-exchange
3. `cursor` = `dishesCollection.find()` in route `/`
4. `allDishes` = showing all documents in `dishesCollection` with: `await cursor.toArray()` in route `/`
5. `numberOfDishes` = `allDishes.length` as a number shown on `dishes.ejs` in route `/`

## in dishes.ejs

1. `numberOfDishes` = number of total documents in mongodb

## in add-dish.ejs

## in dish-details.ejs

1. `dishIngredients` = value: ingredient, array of ingredients
2. `dishName` = value: name of the dish in `dish.ejs` & `dish-details.ejs`
3. `dishImage` = value: image in /images in `dish.ejs`
4. `dishTags` = value: tags, which is an array in `dish.ejs`
5. `dishQuality` = value: quality, which is a number in `dish.ejs`

## in partials

1. `dishName` = value: name of the dish in `dish.ejs` & `dish-details.ejs`
2. `dishImage` = value: image in /images in `dish.ejs`
3. `dishTags` = value: tags, which is an array in `dish.ejs`
4. `dishQuality` = value: quality, which is a number in `dish.ejs`
5. `dishId` = id of the dish for a route in `/dish/dishId` in `dish.ejs`
6. `arrayNumber` = a loop that increases the number of arraynumber depending on the amount of documents saved in mongoDB dishes in `dish.ejs`

Commit message:

added the feature to after adding a dish, redirect to the dishes detail page with the details

PROCESS.md, after:

# Process

This is a guide for myself to document my process, so I won't forget and won't get confused

## Start & Configure Linter & Prettier

1. `npm init`
2. `git init`
3. install extension for vscode: `prettier` & `eslint`
4. install eslint with: `npm install eslint --save-dev`
5. configure eslint with: `npm init @eslint/config`
6. google how to configure prettier with eslint airbnb: `https://gist.github.com/bradtraversy/aab26d1e8983d9f8d79be1a9ca894ab4`
7. install neccesities for eslint and prettier: `npm i -D eslint prettier eslint-plugin-prettier eslint-config-prettier`

## Files Created

8. create a `.prettierrc` file for prettier rules
9. create a `.gitignore` with template from: `https://github.com/github/gitignore/blob/main/Node.gitignore`
10. create a `.env` file for future passwords and keys

## Config Prettier

11. turn on `format on save` in vscode
12. choose `prettier` as default formatter in vscode
13. in `.eslintrc.json` added in `extends`: `"prettier"`
14. in `.eslintrc.json` added `plugins`: `"prettier"`
15. in `.eslintrc.json` added in `rules`: `"prettier/prettier": "error"` & `"no-console": "off"`

16. install express with: `npm install express --save`
17. add a `server.js` file and add the code in it from `https://www.npmjs.com/package/express` to use express
18. install nodemon with: `npm install --save-dev nodemon`
19. in `package.json` add in `scripts`: `"dev": "npm run nodemon"`

20. make a `static` folder and inside a `css` and `images` folder
21. make a `views` folder and inside `partials` and `pages` folder

22. install ejs with: `npm install ejs --save`
23. google how to configure ejs: `https://www.digitalocean.com/community/tutorials/how-to-use-ejs-to-template-your-node-application`
24. configure ejs in `server.js` with: `app.set('view engine', 'ejs');`
25. set middleware for express in `server.js` with: `app.use(express.static("static"));`

26. install `dotenv` with: `npm install dotenv --save`
27. require `dotenv` in `server.js` with: `require('dotenv').config()`

28. installed `ejs language support` extension for my vscode, otherwise the colors won't be blue and it confuses me

29. added `partials` and `pages`

30. in `mongodb` I made a new project called `dish-exchange` and created a shared (free) database
31. i created a user with a password so I can read and write into my database
32. I first my own IP then in `network access` I deleted my ip and clicked on `add IP adress` followed by `allow access from anywhere`
33. I went to `database` > `browse collections` then I `created a database` with the name `dish-exchange`
34. I made a collection called `dishes`
35. I clcicked on `insert document` and made 2 example dishes or `documents` in my dishes database
36. started to read the mongodb documentation with node driver on atlas: `https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/`

## MongoDB

37. installed mongodb with: `npm install mongodb --save`
38. put in `server.js`: `const MongoClient = require("mongodb");`
39. googled on how to use a `dotenv` for my link with a password for my mongodb_URI: `https://northflank.com/guides/connecting-to-a-mongo-db-database-using-node-js`
40. in my mongodb `database` I clicked on `connect` > `connect with application`
41. in my `server.js` I added `const uri = process.env.mongo_uri;` instead of my password
42. I copied the link and put in my `password` of my user, I changed `cluster0` to `cluster1` (like in mongodb) and put this as a variable in my `dotenv` file
43. I also made a `.envSample` file for later

## Deployment

44. I googled "Deploying with Git" and found: `https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git`
45. One of the steps is to install Heroku CLI (linux ubuntu): `https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/heroku-cli#install-the-heroku-cli`
46. I install Heroku CLI with: `curl https://cli-assets.heroku.com/install-ubuntu.sh | sh`
47. installed heroku with: `npm install heroku --save` or `npm install -g heroku --save` followed by `npm audit fix`
48. create heroku remote for a new app with `heroku create -a dishexchange`
49. terminal asked to press any button and to click on the link to `login` into heroku in my browser and I checked my remotes with `git remote -v`
50. commit and push code with: `git push heroku main`
51. went to the heroku website & to my app into: `settings` and then `reveal config vars`. I put in there my mongodb variable with password that's in my `.env file`.
52. because I got the `error H10` wouldn't work, I stumbled upong making a `procfile` with the code: `web: node server.js`, so heroku would know what to start
53. I googled to know more about procfile: `https://dev.to/lawrence_eagles/causes-of-heroku-h10-app-crashed-error-and-how-to-solve-them-3jnl`
54. heroku got an `error H20`, so I googled and found: `https://stackoverflow.com/questions/18679690/heroku-nodejs-app-with-r10-h10-and-h20-errors`
55. instead of having: `app.listen(3000);` I changed it for heroku to: `app.listen(process.env.PORT || 3000)`

56. I started working on my `pages` HTML/EJS a bit, just to have the basics in there (without the web API of some sort)

57. I installed the vscode extension `gitlens` as it shows extra information (e.g. commits, branches, remotes) about my project when I go into the `source control` tab.

##

## to add later:

58. installed `body-parser` with `npm install body-parser --save`
59. added `const= bodyParser = require('body-parser')` in `server.js`

## adding stuff

59. googled "how to link variables from `server.js` to `ejs`" and found: `https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/how-to-make-js-variables-accessible-to-ejs-files/`
60. hard code variables I have in my `.ejs` into `server.js` so I can open it from localhost:3000

61. working on connecting database googled `https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/usage-examples/count/`
62. with `collections.find` it will return a `cursor`, because if it would return all the data at once, the pc's memory might be full and the application wouldn't work good, so instead it returns a `cursor`. source: https://www.mongodb.com/docs/drivers/node/current/fundamentals/crud/read-operations/cursor/
63. You can retrieve data from a cursor with `toArray()` if you do want everything at once and it can handle it, or with `forEach()` to look through them one by one.
64. .length is an array property
65. In `server.js` I got the cursor of `dishesCollection` and got every dish with `toArray()`

66. put data in server.js in route `/`
67. added `numberOfDishes` and `allDishes`
68. In `dish.ejs` we want data from `allDishes` with `forloop`

## working on the add-dish route

69. googled "how to insert a document into a collection of MongoDB with node.js driver" and found: `https://www.w3schools.com/nodejs/nodejs_mongodb_insert.asp`
70. created a test document that i could post into my mongodb
71. it wasn't clear for me on how to use bodyparser with `https://www.npmjs.com/package/body-parser` so i googled and found: `http://expressjs.com/en/resources/middleware/body-parser.html` and also `https://www.tutorialspoint.com/expressjs/expressjs_form_data.htm`
72. ended up googling how to insert document into mongodb and found: `https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EXR5rhcEtw` which I've watched until 5.30
73. made the `add-dish` res.redirect to the `insertedId`

##

74. in `.eslintrc.json` I turned off `"prefer-destructuring": "off"`, becauce I just don't want to bother understanding it now and otherwise it will make my code look confusing.

# Code

## General

`try` = defines the code block to run (to try)

`catch` defines a code block to handle any error

`finally` or `catch` = defines a code block to run regardless of the result

`throw` defines a custom error

source = https://www.w3schools.com/jsref/jsref_try_catch.asp

## Heroku

`heroku --version` = check heroku version

`heroku login` = login with heroku on the browser

`heroku create -a example-app` = to make a new heroku remote and an empty heroku git repo

`git remote -v` = check remotes

`heroku git:remote -a example-app` = to make a heroku remote for the existing example-app

`git remote rename heroku heroku-staging` = rename a remote (this case heroku to heroku-staging)

`git push heroku main` = to deploy code after commiting

source: https://devcenter.heroku.com/articles/git

## EJS

`<% %>` = to run code

`<%= %>` = replace code with text

`<%- %>` = to include parials

source: https://ejs.co/#docs

# Variables

## In server.js

1. `let database` = variable of the database dish-exchange
2. `let dishesCollection` = variable of dishes collection within dish-exchange
3. `cursor` = `dishesCollection.find()` in route `/`
4. `allDishes` = showing all documents in `dishesCollection` with: `await cursor.toArray()` in route `/`
5. `numberOfDishes` = `allDishes.length` as a number shown on `dishes.ejs` in route `/`
6. `dishId` = id of the dish for a route in `/dish/dishId` in `dish.ejs` and `server.js`

7. `newDish` = object with data from the form in `add-dish.ejs`, which will get posted and turned into a document in `mongodb`

8. `urlId` = id used in the route for `dish-details` page

## in dishes.ejs

1. `numberOfDishes` = number of total documents in mongodb

## in add-dish.ejs

## in dish-details.ejs

1. `dishIngredients` = value: ingredient, array of ingredients
2. `dishName` = value: name of the dish in `dish.ejs` & `dish-details.ejs`
3. `dishImage` = value: image in /images in `dish.ejs`
4. `dishTags` = value: tags, which is an array in `dish.ejs`
5. `dishQuality` = value: quality, which is a number in `dish.ejs`

## in partials

1. `dishName` = value: name of the dish in `dish.ejs` & `dish-details.ejs`
2. `dishImage` = value: image in /images in `dish.ejs`
3. `dishTags` = value: tags, which is an array in `dish.ejs`
4. `dishQuality` = value: quality, which is a number in `dish.ejs`
5. `dishId` = id of the dish for a route in `/dish/dishId` in `dish.ejs` and `server.js`
6. `arrayNumber` = a loop that increases the number of arraynumber depending on the amount of documents saved in mongoDB dishes in `dish.ejs`
